---
layout: post
title: "Unlocking the Power Behind Support Vector Machines : A Guide to SVMs"
subtitle: Let's delve into the magic behind intelligent decision making!
categories: ML
tags: [support vector machine, machine learning, classification]
---



<h2> Introduction </h2>

In the ever-evolving landscape of machine learning, Support Vector Machines (SVMs) stand tall as a formidable force. These remarkable algorithms transformed the way we approach pattern recognition and classification. With their ability to unravel complex relationships and make precise decisions, SVMs have become a go-to tool for data scientists across diverse domains.

In this guide, we take a grounded perspective, exploring the core concepts of SVMs and their real-world applications. SVMs excel in finding decision boundaries and navigating through intricate data landscapes, making them an invaluable asset in the data scientist's toolkit. Whether you're a curious learner or a seasoned practitioner, this guide aims to provide a realistic understanding of SVMs. We'll unravel their inner workings, examine their strengths and limitations, and discuss practical considerations for successful implementation.

So let's get right into it!

<h3> What are Support Vector Machines? </h3>

A support vector machine or SVM is a supervised learning algorithm that is primarily used for classification task (dealing with categorical data) , but can also be used for regression tasks (dealing with quantitative data). When dealing with classification tasks, the aim of an SVM is to find an optimal boundary called a *hyperplane* that can seperate data points of two or more classes. This optimization is done by maximizing the distance of the boundary - also called the *margin* - from the nearest data points of each class. These nearest data points are known as *support vectors*, hence the name *Support Vector Machine*.


<h3> Intuition on Hyperplanes and Support Vectors </h3>

In the paragraph above I define hyperplanes as a boundary, more so, a *decision boundary* which can separate groups of datapoints that lie together. Suppose we have a dataset on cats and dogs with two features, the tail length of the animal and the ear length. When we plot a graph for this dataset, it will form a 2-Dimensional plot.

Now, we can visualize a pattern in this graph plot. 











